
# day 3

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiple_line_segment_intersection

# day 4


we can return early, and not need to calculate pt2 counters.

=> base case: 14000 us
=> early return case: 4900 us


in addition, `is_valid()` seems like a good candidate for vector instructions.

    ```
    uint8_t     -> 8 bits
        6 chars => 48 bits

    64 bit stuff is MMX
    128 bit is SSE(2)
    256 bit is AVX(2)
    ```

interestingly, packing the digits to `__m64` (and using MMX instructions) instead of std::array<uint8_t, 6> actually makes things much slower. executing only part1 -- base version gives 2500 us. MMX version does generate much smaller assembly with only 15 lines, while the base version generates 42. however, MMX version runs _much_ slower -- around 6000 us.

but why such effect?
    - maybe it could be explained by the branch predictor? as we are processing the numbers in a brute-force fashion, the majority of the if-clauses are same for subsequent numbers, so the CPU guesses are rarely wrong. with vectorized instructions, we are removing some of the if-clauses, which prevents CPU from guessing forward. so, predictable if-clauses may be better than less if-clauses?

* how all the instrinsic headers differ? e.g <immintrin.h> vs <mmintrin.h> vs others?
    -> https://stackoverflow.com/questions/11228855/header-files-for-x86-simd-intrinsics


# day 6

* hashmap of (parent -> all children) seems logical. however, it feels like knowing parent of a child is more important than the other way around. maybe switching to hashmap of (child -> parent) will help?
    -> actually, part1 benefits from former, part2 benefits from latter? so, the data struct cannot be shared then?

* with hashmap of (parent -> all children):
    [timer] parse 649 μs
    [timer] get_orbit_checksum 80 μs
    [timer] get_parents 2033 μs
    [timer] get_parents 1685 μs
    [timer] get_orbit_difference 3729 μs

    NB: get_orbit_difference includes get_parents times


# day 7

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steinhaus%E2%80%93Johnson%E2%80%93Trotter_algorithm
* https://github.com/benediktwerner/intcode


# day 12

instead of thinking about speeding up a bruteforce solution, it's much better to think about simplifying the problem itself. in this case, splitting period computation of dimensions to be independent is a much simpler task to complete.

ref: https://github.com/ednl/aoc2019


# day 13

TODO: will have to rethink how the input is handled with the intcode solver. currently, when the INPUT instruction comes, it expects the input data to be fully ready. however, with Day13 setup, it doesn't work, as we would like to compute the input data at last possible moment. otherwise, the joystick input is computed based on old data, which will be irrelevant in couple steps. the solution there was to  keep the input only to single int and modify the "input data pointer" backwards each time it tries to advance.

in general, it would seem that the API's chosen for intcode solver are not good enough -- they are too constricting. it would probably be good to re-do them with less constraints in mind. not sure how though.

# day 14

initially, tried a list based approach -- all recipes are placed in a map, keyed by the output ID. then given an inventory of ingredients (initialized to 1 FUEL), attempt to decompose any ingredient from it based on any recipes. this did not work, because all recipies are of the same value (ie, there's no ordering). so, the application cannot choose properly between (1) a recipe that needs one extra batch to cover the ingredients, and (2) a recipe that will create those extra ingredients by itself. everything works, when 2 is chosen over 1, but otherwise extra elements are created unnecessarily.
    -> instead of list-based approach, a full graph based approach is required. visited nodes are evaluated starting from FUEL node, and extra recipes are evaluated as soon as possible.